                                                      UNITED STATES COMMISSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS




Memorandum
Date:         March 15, 2013

To:           The Honorable Commissioners

From:         Adam Trzeciak, Inspector General

Subject:      The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights: Fiscal Year 2012 Compliance with the
              Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Act of 2010


The Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Act of 2010 (IPERA), among other
things, expanded on requirements for executive branch agencies to identify, estimate,
and report on programs and activities susceptible to significant improper payments. 1
Significant improper payments, as defined by IPERA, are gross annual improper
payments in the program exceeding (1) both 2.5 percent of program outlays and $10
million of all program or activity payments during the fiscal year reported, or (2) $100
million (regardless of the improper payment error rate).

To implement IPERA, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in April 2011 issued
government-wide guidance that required agencies to report to the President and
Congress, through their annual performance and accountability report or annual financial
report, an estimate of the annual amount of improper payments for all programs and
activities determined to be susceptible to significant improper payments, regardless of
the dollar amount of the estimate. 2 In addition, OMB’s guidance stated that each agency
inspector general should review agency improper payment reporting in the performance
and accountability report or annual financial report, and accompanying materials, to
determine if the agency is in compliance with the Improper Payments Information Act of
2002. OMB’s guidance also states that inspectors general should complete their reviews
and determinations within 120 days of the publication of the federal agency’s
performance and accountability report or annual financial report.



1
 Pub. L. No. 111-204, 124 Stat. 2224 (July 22, 2010). The statute defines an improper payment as any
payment that should not have been made or that was made in an incorrect amount (including
overpayments and underpayments) under statutory, contractual, administrative, or other legally applicable
requirements. It includes any payment to an ineligible recipient, any payment for an ineligible good or
service, any duplicate payment, any payment for a good or service not received (except for such payments
where authorized by law), and any payment that does not account for credit for applicable discounts.
2
 OMB Guidance M-11-16 Issuance of Revised Parts I and II to Appendix C of OMB Circular A-123. (Apr.
14, 2011).




Page 1                                              OIG/USCCR-13-3 Compliance with IPERA
We have completed an audit of the United States Commission on Civil Rights’ (USCCR)
fiscal year 2012 compliance with IPERA. Our audit determined that USCCR has
complied with the reporting requirements of IPERA, has performed the required risk
assessment to identify those programs and activities susceptible to significant improper
payments, and has performed a payment recapture audit cost-benefit analysis. In
addition, we determined that our previously reported fiscal year 2011 noncompliance
issues have been resolved. Those issues were related to (1) not reporting improper
payment information in USCCR’s performance and accountability report, and (2) not
performing a risk assessment to identify programs and activities susceptible to significant
improper payments or seeking a waiver from OMB for conducting such an assessment. 3

To determine whether USCCR was compliant with certain IPERA requirements, we
reviewed USCCR’s fiscal year 2012 performance and accountability report, questioned
USCCR personnel and USCCR’s independent public accountant responsible for the
fiscal year 2012 financial statements audit, and reviewed USCCR’s risk assessment and
supporting documentation in relation to OMB’s government-wide IPERA guidance.

As required by IPERA and OMB guidance, USCCR reported in its fiscal year 2012
performance and accountability report that it conducted a risk assessment for all relevant
payments and determined that the risk of significant improper payments was low.
USCCR further reported that since USCCR’s total budget is less than the $10 million
threshold for significant improper payments, it is virtually impossible for the Commission
to have improper payments over $10 million, and that based on its risk assessment,
USCCR does not have significant improper payments. Further, during fiscal year 2012,
USCCR performed a payment recapture audit cost-benefit analysis and reported that the
costs of such an audit would exceed the benefits. Nothing came to our attention during
this audit that would indicate that USCCR is susceptible to significant improper
payments.

We conducted this audit from January 2013 to March 2013 in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our conclusions based on our audit objectives.

Agency Comments

The Inspector General provided USCCR with a draft of this document for review and
comment and they had no comments.

If you would like to discuss the results of this audit please contact me at (202) 512-5748
or trzeciaka@gao.gov.



3
OIG, The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights: Compliance with the Improper Payments Elimination and
Recovery Act of 2010, OIG/USCCR-12-1 (Washington, D.C.: March 15, 2012).




Page 2                                            OIG/USCCR-13-3 Compliance with IPERA
List of Addressees

The Honorable Martin R. Castro, Chairman
The Honorable Abigail Thernstrom, Vice Chair
The Honorable Roberta Achtenberg
The Honorable Todd Gaziano
The Honorable Gail Heriot
The Honorable Peter Kirsanow
The Honorable David Kladney
The Honorable Michael Yaki




(999829)




Page 3                                     OIG/USCCR-13-3 Compliance with IPERA
Reporting Fraud, Waste, and Abuse in the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights

To report fraud, waste, or abuse in Commission programs and operations (which you may
do anonymously), do one of the following:

• Call toll-free (866) 680-7963 to speak with a hotline specialist, 24 hours a day, 7 days a
  week.

• Report online at: https://oig.alertline.com.


Obtaining Copies of Office of the Inspector General Reports, Publications, and
Testimonies


Copies of OIG reports, publications, and testimonies are available on the Commission’s
website: http://www.usccr.gov/OIG/index.php.




Page 4                                           OIG/USCCR-13-3 Compliance with IPERA
