U.S. COMMISSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS
 OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL



SEMIANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS

       October 1, 2012, through March 31, 2013
                    TABLE OF CONTENTS
Letter                                                                           1

Introduction                                                                     3

Activities of the Office of Inspector General                                    4

Appendix: Reporting Requirements of the Inspector
General Act of 1978, as Amended                                                  7




Page i                    Semiannual Report, October 1, 2012, through March 31, 2013
                                                          U. S. COMMISSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS
Letter
April 26, 2013



Commissioners, U.S. Commission on Civil Rights
1331 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Suite 1150
Washington, DC 20425

I am submitting this semiannual report in accordance with Section 5 of the Inspector
General Act of 1978, as amended. The report summarizes the activities of the Office of
Inspector General (OIG) for the period October 1, 2012, to March 31, 2013.

The act requires that you transmit the report to the appropriate congressional
committees within 30 days of receipt. Your transmittal should also include any
comments you consider appropriate and other statistical tables and reports required by
law.

During this semiannual period, the OIG issued an important report on management
challenges existing at the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights (Commission) in 2012. One
of the serious management challenges facing the Commission concerns vacancies in
key positions, including staff director, deputy staff director, and general counsel, that
have remained vacant for several years. The staff director, who serves as the
administrative head of the Commission, must be appointed by the President with the
concurrence of a majority of the Commissioners. The OIG believes that until the staff
director position and other key positions are filled, the ability of the Commission to
establish an efficient and effective organization is significantly hindered.

I appreciate the Commission’s support and look forward to working with you to help
promote economy and efficiency in the operations of the U.S. Commission on Civil
Rights.

Respectfully submitted,




Adam Trzeciak
Inspector General




Page 1                              Semiannual Report, October 1, 2012, through March 31, 2013
List of Commissioners

The Honorable Martin R. Castro, Chairman

The Honorable Abigail Thernstrom, Vice Chair

The Honorable Roberta Achtenberg

The Honorable Todd Gaziano

The Honorable Gail Heriot

The Honorable Peter Kirsanow

The Honorable David Kladney

The Honorable Michael Yaki




Page 2                           Semiannual Report, October 1, 2012, through March 31, 2013
INTRODUCTION
THE U.S. COMMISSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS
The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights (Commission), created pursuant to the Civil Rights
Act of 1957, 1 is responsible for investigating allegations of voting rights deprivations
because of color, race, religion, sex, age, disability, or national origin or as a result of
any pattern or practice of fraud. In addition, the Commission is also responsible for
performing the following functions regarding discrimination, denials of equal protection
of the laws, or the administration of justice because of color, race, religion, sex, age,
disability or national origin: (a) collecting and studying information; (b) making
appraisals of federal laws and policies; (c) serving as a national clearinghouse for
information; and (d) preparing public service announcements and advertising
campaigns. The Commission may hold hearings and, within specific guidelines, issue
subpoenas to obtain certain records and require witnesses to appear at hearings. It is
also required to maintain state advisory committees and consult with representatives of
federal, state, and local governments and private organizations to advance its fact-
finding work.

The Commission is required to issue reports on its investigative findings to Congress
and the President, and to recommend legislative remedies. The Commission also must
submit annually to Congress and the President at least one report that monitors federal
civil rights enforcement in the United States. In addition, because it lacks enforcement
powers that would enable it to apply remedies in individual cases, the Commission
refers specific complaints it receives to the appropriate federal, state, or local
government agencies for action.

THE OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights’ Office of Inspector General (OIG) was created by
the Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 2012. 2 The Act
designated the Inspector General of the Government Accountability Office (GAO) to
serve as the Inspector General of the Commission, and directed personnel of GAO’s
OIG to perform the duties, responsibilities, and authorities of the Commission’s
Inspector General as specified in the Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended. 3 In
our capacity as the Commission’s OIG, we audit and investigate programs and
operations administered or financed by the Commission, and keep the Commissioners
and Congress fully and currently informed about fraud or other serious problems,
abuses, and deficiencies we identify.




1
41 U.S.C. 1975 et seq.
2
Pub. L. No. 112-55, 125 Stat. 552, 628 (Nov. 18, 2011).
3
5 U.S.C. app.



Page 3                                      Semiannual Report, October 1, 2012, through March 31, 2013
ACTIVITIES OF THE OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
AUDITS AND EVALUATIONS
As shown in Table 1, we issued two audit reports and one evaluation. Details of these
reports are provided below.

Table 1: Issued Audit and Evaluation Reports October 1, 2012, through March 31,
2013

           Report number and date                                   Title
    OIG/USCCR-13-1, November 7, 2012            Fiscal Year 2012 Management and Performance
                                                Challenges
    OIG/USCCR-13-2, November 15, 2012           Federal Information Security Management Act
                                                Evaluation for Fiscal Year 2012
    OIG/USCCR-13-3, March 15, 2013              The U.S. Commission of Civil Rights: Fiscal Year
                                                2012 Compliance with the Improper Payments
                                                Elimination and Recovery Act of 2010
Source: OIG.

FISCAL YEAR 2012 MANAGEMENT AND PERFORMANCE CHALLENGES
(OIG/USCCR-13-1)
For fiscal year 2012, the OIG identified two serious management challenges for the
Commission: the need to (1) align its organizational structure with its budget, which has
remained constant for more than a decade, and (2) better use state advisory
committees to help the Commission achieve its mission. The Commission has several
vacancies in key positions, including staff director, deputy staff director, and general
counsel, that have remained vacant for several years. The staff director, who serves as
the administrative head of the Commission, must be appointed by the President with the
concurrence of a majority of the Commissioners. We believe that until the staff director
position and other key positions are filled, the ability of the Commission to establish an
efficient and effective organization is significantly hindered. The Commission agreed
with the reported challenges. We did not make recommendations in this report.
FEDERAL INFORMATION SECURITY MANAGEMENT ACT EVALUATION FOR
FISCAL YEAR 2012 (OIG/USCCR-13-2)
Our evaluation determined that the Commission has established an overall information
security program that is generally consistent with the requirements of the Federal
Information Security Management Act of 2002, 4 OMB implementing guidance, and
standards and guidance issued by the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
However, we identified improvements needed in contingency planning, configuration
and vulnerability management, risk management, and security training. Our report
included five recommendations to help the agency more fully implement federal

4
    44 U.S.C. 3541 et seq.



Page 4                                  Semiannual Report, October 1, 2012, through March 31, 2013
information security requirements for these program elements. The Commission agreed
with our findings and recommendations.

THE U.S. COMMISSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS: FISCAL YEAR 2012 COMPLIANCE
WITH THE IMPROPER PAYMENTS ELIMINATION AND RECOVERY ACT OF 2010
(OIG/USCCR-13-3)
Our audit determined that the Commission complied with the reporting requirements of
the Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Act of 2010, 5 performed the required
risk assessment to identify those programs and activities susceptible to significant
improper payments, and performed a payment recapture audit cost-benefit analysis.
The fiscal year 2012 report contained no recommendations. The Commission agreed
with our conclusions and had no further comments.

INVESTIGATIVE ACTIVITIES
The OIG received two complaints. As shown in Table 2, we closed one investigation
and did not open any new investigations during this reporting period. At the end of the
reporting period, four investigations remained open.

Table 2: Summary of OIG Investigations October 1, 2012, through March 31, 2013
    Investigations open at the start of the reporting period                                                 5
    New investigations initiated this reporting period                                                       0
    Total investigations                                                                                     5
    Disposition of investigations
     Investigations closed                                                                                   1
     Total investigations open at the end of the reporting period                                            4
Source: OIG.

OTHER ACTIVITIES
LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY REVIEW
As required by the Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended, the OIG reviews
proposed legislation and regulations to assess whether the proposed legislation or
regulation impacts the economy and efficiency of the Commission’s programs and
operations. During this period, we identified no legislation or regulation affecting the
programs or operations of the Commission.

PEER REVIEW
Government Auditing Standards require that each audit organization performing audits
in accordance with these standards must have an external peer review. The objectives
of a peer review are to determine, for the audit function, whether an effective quality

5
    Pub. L. No. 111-204, 124 Stat 2224 (July 22, 2010).



Page 5                                          Semiannual Report, October 1, 2012, through March 31, 2013
control system has been established in the office and if policies, procedures, and
applicable government auditing standards are being followed. Peer reviews must be
performed at least once every 3 years by reviewers independent of the audit
organization being reviewed.

The Inspector General Act requires federal offices of inspectors general to include in
their semiannual reports to Congress an appendix containing the results of any peer
review conducted by another OIG during the reporting period, or, if no peer review was
conducted within the reporting period, a statement identifying the date of the last peer
review conducted by another OIG. We have not scheduled or undergone a peer review.
Further, we did not conduct a peer review of any other OIG.




Page 6                            Semiannual Report, October 1, 2012, through March 31, 2013
APPENDIX: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS OF THE INSPECTOR
GENERAL ACT OF 1978, AS AMENDED
Table 3 identifies the reporting requirements prescribed by the Inspector General Act of
1978, as amended. References noted as “none” indicate that there was no information
to report during this reporting period. Tables 4 and 5 identify the number of reports
issued with questioned costs and recommendations that funds be put to better use,
respectively.

Table 3: Index of IG Act Reporting Requirements
Reference                 Reporting requirements                                             Page
Section 4(a)(2)           Review of legislation and regulations                                  5
Section 5(a)(1)           Significant problems, abuses, and deficiencies                         4
Section 5(a)(2)           Recommendations for corrective action with respect to              None
                          significant problems, abuses, and deficiencies
Section 5(a)(3)           Significant recommendations described in previous                  None
                          semiannual reports for which corrective action has not been
                          completed
Section 5(a)(4)           Matters referred to prosecuting authorities and resulting          None
                          prosecutions and convictions
Sections 5(a)(5) and      Summary of instances reported to the Commissioners where           None
6(b)(2)                   records were not provided or other information or assistance
                          was refused
Section 5(a)(6)           List of reports issued during the reporting period                     4
Section 5(a)(7)           Summary of significant reports                                    4 and 5
Section 5(a)(8)          Statistical table—audit, inspection, and evaluation reports with   Table 4
                         questioned costs
Section 5(a)(9)          Statistical table—audit, inspection, and evaluation reports with   Table 5
                         recommendations that funds be put to better use
Section 5(a)(10)         Summary of audit reports issued before the commencement of          None
                         the reporting period for which no management decision has
                         been made
Section 5(a)(11)         Significant revised management decisions made during the            None
                         reporting period
Section 5(a)(12)         Significant revised management decisions with which the             None
                         Inspector General is in disagreement
Section 5(a)(14) through Peer review requirements                                                5
(16)
Section 5(d)             Serious or flagrant problems, abuses, or deficiencies reported      None
                         to the Commissioners
Source: OIG.




Page 7                                  Semiannual Report, October 1, 2012, through March 31, 2013
Table 4: Audit, Inspection, and Evaluation Reports with Questioned Costs
                            Number of         Number of        Questioned     Unsupported
Reporting requirement         reports   recommendations             costs           costs
For which no management             0                 0                 0               0
decision has been made by
the commencement of the
reporting period
Which were issued during            0                    0               0                0
the reporting period
For which a management              0                    0               0                0
decision was made during
the reporting period
For which no management             0                    0               0                0
decision has been made by
the end of the reporting
period
Source: OIG.




Page 8                           Semiannual Report, October 1, 2012, through March 31, 2013
Table 5: Audit, Inspection, and Evaluation Reports with Recommendations That
Funds Be Put to Better Use
                                                             Number of
Reporting requirement           Number of reports      recommendations            Dollar value
For which no management                         0                    0                       0
decision has been made by the
commencement of the reporting
period
Which were issued during the                    0                       0                    0
reporting period
For which a management                          0                       0                    0
decision was made during the
reporting period
For which no management                         0                       0                    0
decision has been made by the
end of the reporting period
Source: OIG.




Page 9                              Semiannual Report, October 1, 2012, through March 31, 2013
REPORTING FRAUD, WASTE, AND ABUSE IN THE U.S. COMMISSION ON
CIVIL RIGHTS
To report fraud, waste, or abuse in Commission programs and operations (which you
may do anonymously), do one of the following.

•   Call toll-free (866) 680-7963 to speak with a hotline specialist, 24 hours a day,
    7 days a week.

•   Report online at: https://oig.alertline.com.

OBTAINING COPIES OF OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL REPORTS,
PUBLICATIONS, AND TESTIMONIES
•   Copies of OIG reports, publications, and testimonies are available on the
    Commission’s website: http://www.usccr.gov/OIG/index.php.




Page 10                               Semiannual Report, October 1, 2012, through March 31, 2013
