                                                      UNITED STATES COMMISSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS


Memorandum
Date:         November 15, 2012

To:           The Honorable Commissioners

From:         Frances Garcia, Inspector General

Subject:      Fiscal Year 2012 Federal Information Security Management Act Evaluation


We have completed an independent evaluation of the effectiveness of the United States
Commission on Civil Rights’ (USCCR) information security program and practices for
fiscal year 2012 as prescribed by the Federal Information Security Management Act of
2002 (FISMA).1 FISMA requires federal agencies to develop, document, and implement
an agencywide information security program to provide security for the information and
information systems that support their operations and assets, including those provided or
managed by another agency, contractor, or other source. In addition, this act requires
each agency to report annually on their information security programs to the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB). Further, each agency is required to have an annual
independent evaluation of its information security program and practices, including
control testing and compliance assessment, which is to be performed by the agency
Inspector General (IG) or by an independent external auditor.

The Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 2012 designated that the
Government Accountability Office (GAO) IG holds the position of USCCR IG and
directed that personnel from GAO’s Office of Inspector General (OIG) be utilized to
perform the duties of USCCR IG. This is the first FISMA review we have performed. As a
result, there were no prior USCCR IG recommendations to follow up on.

Our evaluation showed that USCCR has established an overall information security
program that is generally consistent with the requirements of FISMA, OMB implementing
guidance, and standards and guidance issued by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST). However, we did identify improvements needed for elements of this
program that concern contingency planning, configuration and vulnerability management,
risk management, and security training. This report includes recommendations to help
the agency more fully implement federal information security requirements for these
program elements. (See Attachment.)




1
 Enacted as Title III of the E-Government Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-347, 116 Stat. 2899, 2946
(Dec. 17, 2002).


Page 1                                       OIG/USCCR-13-2 USCCR FISMA FY 2012
The objectives of our evaluation were to assess (1) the effectiveness of USCCR’s
information security policies, procedures, and practices; and (2) USCCR’s compliance
with FISMA information security requirements and other federal information security
policies, procedures, standards, and guidelines. We focused our work on USCCR’s
implementation of required information security program elements and practices as
reflected in IG reporting metrics for fiscal year 2012, provided by the Department of
Homeland Security.2 These metrics address 11 information security areas:
(1) Continuous Monitoring Management, (2) Configuration Management, (3) Identity and
Access Management, (4) Incident Response and Reporting, (5) Risk Management, (6)
Security Training, (7) Plan of Action and Milestones (POA&M), (8) Remote Access
Management, (9) Contingency Planning, (10) Contractor Systems, and (11) Security
Capital Planning. To assess USCCR’s performance for these areas, we analyzed its
information security policies and procedures and determined the extent to which specific
security requirements were implemented. We also considered an external auditor’s work
on USCCR’s biennial assessment of information security and incorporated the results
into our evaluation as appropriate.3

We conducted this evaluation from September 2012 to November 2012 in accordance
with the quality standards established by the Council of the Inspectors General on
Integrity and Efficiency. Those standards require that we plan and perform the evaluation
to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our objectives. We believe the evidence obtained provides a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our evaluation objectives.

Agency Comments

The IG provided USCCR with a draft of this report for review and comment. USCCR
agreed with our recommendations and provided no technical comments.

Actions taken in response to our recommendations are expected to be reported to my
office within 60 days.

If you would like to discuss these conclusions and recommendations please contact me
at (202) 512-5748 or garciaf@gao.gov.




2
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, FY 2012 Inspector General Federal Information Security
Management Act Reporting Metrics, (Mar. 6, 2012).
3
NucoreVision Incorporated, Assessment of USCCR Information Security & Assurance Program as it
Relates to FISMA Requirements inclusive of Inspector General Response, (Lanham, MD: Nov. 9, 2012).

Page 2                                     OIG/USCCR-13-2 USCCR FISMA FY 2012
List of Addressees
The Honorable Martin R. Castro, Chairman
The Honorable Abigail Thernstrom, Vice Chair
The Honorable Roberta Achtenberg
The Honorable Todd Gaziano
The Honorable Gail Heriot
The Honorable Peter Kirsanow
The Honorable David Kladney
The Honorable Michael Yaki




Page 3                              OIG/USCCR-13-2 USCCR FISMA FY 2012
Attachment

Improvements Are Needed to Fully Implement Security Program

Our overall evaluation showed that the United States Commission on Civil Rights
(USCCR) has established an information security program that is generally consistent
with federal requirements, guidance, and standards. However, in evaluating elements of
this program based on the Department of Homeland Security’s reporting metrics for
Inspectors General (IG), we identified specific improvements needed to help ensure that
security requirements are fully implemented. Evaluation results for these program
elements are as follows.

Limitations Exist in Information Technology Contingency Planning

USCCR maintains an overall continuity program, which, among other things, provides for
the health and safety of USCCR employees, contractors, and visitors, and helps ensure
that USCCR will be able to maintain its operational capability in the face of significant
threats. As a key element of this program, USCCR maintains a Continuity of Operations
Plan (COOP) that:
        identifies essential agency functions, vital records, and critical systems;
        assigns roles and responsibilities, orders of succession, and delegations of
         authority for USCCR staff; and
        describes the activation of the COOP, relocation to an alternate site, and
         resumption of operations once the emergency or other event has concluded.4

This plan covers business operations and systems owned or maintained by USCCR,
which is responsible for their continuity of operations. However, this plan does not cover
hosted systems on contractor or other government networks, such as the USCCR’s
electronic mail, document management, and publicly-accessible websites, that are the
responsibility of each respective service provider.

While USCCR has taken steps to sustain the agency’s essential functions and provide
continuity of operations in the event of a disruption, USCCR has never performed
testing, training, and exercises to validate the effectiveness of the USCCR continuity
program. According to NIST, testing is a critical element of a viable contingency
capability. Testing enables plan deficiencies to be identified and addressed by validating
one or more of the system components and the operability of the plan. Testing can take
on several forms and accomplish several objectives but should be conducted in as close
to an operating environment as possible. Training for personnel with contingency plan
responsibilities should be conducted annually to ensure that the staff is prepared for an
emergency or other event. Finally, exercises are the simulation of an emergency
designed to validate the viability of one or more aspects of a continuity program. In an



4
USCCR, Continuity of Operations Plan, (June 2010).

Page 4                                     OIG/USCCR-13-2 USCCR FISMA FY 2012
exercise, personnel validate the content of a plan through discussion of their roles and
their responses to emergency situations, execution of responses in a simulated
operational environment, or other means of validating responses that do not involve
using the actual operational environment.

Configuration and Vulnerability Management Weaknesses Increase Security Risk

Our evaluation showed that USCCR has a process for configuration management that
includes baseline configurations and hardening guidelines.5 However, during the biennial
assessment in 2012, vulnerability scans by an external auditor identified numerous
vulnerabilities that pose a significant risk to information systems used and accessed by
USCCR. Further, USCCR cannot fully remediate these configuration-related
weaknesses and vulnerabilities due to the technological limitations of outdated
computers. While USCCR plans to replace this equipment by February 2013, these
weaknesses currently represent a risk for USCCR’s information systems and the
operations they support.

USCCR also does not have a written configuration management policy. The Federal
Information Security Management Act (FISMA) requires that federal agencies’
information security programs include policies and procedures to ensure compliance with
minimally acceptable system configuration requirements. A well-defined configuration
management policy and process that integrates information security is needed to ensure
that the security of an information system or the organization is not adversely affected by
change. For example, adjustments to a system’s configuration may be required as a
result of new, enhanced, corrected, or updated hardware and software capabilities;
patches for correcting software flaws and other errors to existing components; or new
security threats or changing business functions.

USCCR Lacks Risk Management Framework and Policy for Information System Security

USCCR has implemented security measures and controls that primarily address security
risks for individual information systems. This approach includes ad-hoc processes for the
selection and implementation of security controls and continuous monitoring or periodic
assessment of these controls. However, it does not address information security risks
from an overall agency perspective through a comprehensive formal governance
structure and organization-wide risk management strategy, as prescribed by NIST
guidance.




5
 A baseline configuration is a set of specifications for a system that has been formally reviewed and
agreed on at a given point in time and that can be changed only through change control procedures. A
“hardening guide” is a security configuration checklist that helps organizations to automatically set and
verify the appropriate security settings for different information technology products.


Page 5                                         OIG/USCCR-13-2 USCCR FISMA FY 2012
According to the Deputy Chief Information Officer (CIO),6 the USCCR does not have a
formal Risk Management Framework or written policy on risk management. During our
evaluation of the risk management process, we also determined that the Deputy CIO did
not brief the Commissioners on specific risks and threat activity. We believe such
briefings are important in establishing and maintaining an organization-wide risk
management strategy for information security.

A Risk Management Framework emphasizes building information security capabilities
into federal information systems through the application of state-of-the-practice
management, operational, and technical security controls; and maintaining awareness of
the security state of information systems on an ongoing basis through enhanced
monitoring processes. In addition, the framework provides essential information to
senior leaders to facilitate decisions regarding the acceptance of risk to organizational
operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the nation, arising from the
operation and use of information systems.7

Policies and Procedures to Ensure Security Training Compliance Should Be Improved

Our evaluation determined that USCCR does not have effective policies and procedures
to ensure all staff with network access receive annual information security awareness
training, as required. USCCR has procured information security training support to
provide (1) annual information security awareness training for USCCR employees and
contractor staff with network access, and (2) role-based information security awareness
training for those with specialized responsibilities. For fiscal year 2012, the training was
available online, but the Deputy CIO maintained hard-copy files to help show the extent
to which USCCR complied with these training requirements. We created a list of 44
users as of September 30, 2012, by reviewing network documentation and the
September 2012 staff directory and staff roster. Of those 44 users, 17 (39 percent) had a
certificate on file to document completion of annual information security awareness
training in fiscal year 2012. The remaining 27 users (61 percent) did not have a
certificate on file. This included Commissioners and Regional Staff that have access to
USCCR electronic mail and shared documents but were not included in the process to
ensure completion of annual information security awareness training.




6
 The Deputy CIO is responsible for information security and enterprise architecture. There is not currently
a CIO for the USCCR.
7
 NIST, Guide for Applying the Risk Management Framework to Federal Information Systems, Special
Publication 800-37 Revision 1 (Gaithersburg, MD; February 2010).

Page 6                                         OIG/USCCR-13-2 USCCR FISMA FY 2012
Conclusions

It is essential to ongoing program effectiveness that USCCR continually assess whether
established processes and practices are operating as intended and make certain that
changes in federal security requirements, guidance, and techniques are proactively
incorporated into a formal, well-documented program. In addition, senior management
involvement in determining how the organization assesses and mitigates information
system-related security risks will help to strengthen the agency’s overall information
security program.

Recommendations for Executive Action

To help strengthen USCCR’s overall information security program, we recommend that
the Deputy CIO take the following five actions:
(1) Conduct COOP testing, training, and exercises to validate the effectiveness of
    USCCR continuity program.
(2) Ensure the timely remediation of vulnerabilities due to outdated equipment.
(3) Create a written configuration management policy to ensure compliance with
    minimally acceptable system configuration requirements.
(4) Develop and provide for USCCR senior management consideration a proposed
    approach for establishing a comprehensive governance structure and organization-
    wide risk management strategy for information system security that would include a
    process for keeping management apprised of specific risks and threat activity.
(5) Develop and implement policies and procedures for ensuring all staff with network
    access complete information security awareness and role-based training
    requirements as of the end of each fiscal year reporting period.




(999824)


Page 7                                OIG/USCCR-13-2 USCCR FISMA FY 2012
Reporting Fraud, Waste, and Abuse in the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights

To report fraud, waste, or abuse in Commission programs and operations, do one of the
following. (You may do so anonymously.)

•   Call toll-free (866) 680-7963 to speak with a hotline specialist, available 24 hours a
    day, 7 days a week.

•   Report online at: https://oig.alertline.com.


Obtaining Copies of Office of the Inspector General Reports, Publications, and
Testimonies

Copies of OIG reports, publications, and testimonies are available on the Commission’s
website: http://www.usccr.gov/OIG/index.php.




Page 8                                   OIG/USCCR-13-2 USCCR FISMA FY 2012
