                                                       UNITED STATES COMMISSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS


Memorandum
Date:       November 7, 2012

To:         The Honorable Commissioners

From:       Frances Garcia, Inspector General

Subject: Fiscal Year 2012 Management and Performance Challenges

The Reports Consolidation Act of 2000 requires the Inspector General (IG) to report
annually on the most serious management and performance challenges facing the U.S.
Commission on Civil Rights (Commission) and to assess the Commission’s progress in
addressing those challenges. 1 For fiscal year 2012, we have identified two challenges:
(1) aligning the organizational structure with the budget, and (2) better leveraging state
advisory committees. (See attachments I and II for more information about these
challenges.)

To identify these management and performance challenges, we systematically reviewed
Commission reports (annual performance and accountability reports, strategic plan, and
strategic human capital plan) to determine what challenges, if any, the Commission had
previously reported. We also analyzed past audit reports issued by GAO and reviewed
Commission policies and procedures relevant to these issues and concerns. In addition,
we used a semi-structured interview to obtain the opinions of the eight Commissioners,
eight Commission managers located at headquarters and in the regional offices, two
past Commission managers, and the financial statement auditor. In particular, we asked
these officials to discuss issues and concerns they believe seriously affect the ability of
the Commission to achieve its mission and goals, how such issues or concerns affect the
Commission, and what actions were taken during fiscal year 2012 to address them. The
scope of our work did not include contacting members of the state advisory committees.
It should be noted that additional challenges and weaknesses may exist in areas where
we have yet to perform audits or investigations or in areas concerning fraud or other
serious problems, abuses, and deficiencies.

We conducted this performance audit from July 2012 to November 2012 in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our conclusions based on our audit
objectives.




1
Pub. L. No. 106-531, 114 Stat. 2537 (Nov. 22, 2000).


Page 1                                                  OIG/USCCR-13-1 USCCR Challenges FY 2012
Agency Comments

The Inspector General provided the Commission with a draft of this report for review and
comment. The Commission agreed with these challenges. The Commission also
provided technical comments that were incorporated, as appropriate.

If you would like to discuss these challenges please contact me at (202) 512-5748 or
garciaf@gao.gov.




Page 2                                         OIG/USCCR-13-1 USCCR Challenges FY 2012
List of Addressees

The Honorable Martin R. Castro, Chairman

The Honorable Abigail Thernstrom, Vice Chair

The Honorable Roberta Achtenberg

The Honorable Todd Gaziano

The Honorable Gail Heriot

The Honorable Peter Kirsanow

The Honorable David Kladney

The Honorable Michael Yaki




Page 3                                         OIG/USCCR-13-1 USCCR Challenges FY 2012
Attachment I

Aligning Organizational Structure with the Budget

The United States Commission on Civil Rights’ (Commission) organizational structure is
rooted in the past and does not effectively support the operations of the Commission.
While facing flat appropriations of about $9 million for more than a decade, the
Commission has continued to operate with fewer staff. Staff reductions were generally
achieved through attrition, with no subsequent organizational restructuring to improve
mission efficiency. As a result, the Commission has an organizational structure that has
vacancies in key positions, little flexibility to fill those vacancies, and employees that are
holding multiple management positions. Moreover, the Commission has been operating
without a staff director, who would normally serve as the administrative head of the
agency. Given these conditions, the Commission is faced with a serious challenge of
aligning its organizational structure with its budget to efficiently and effectively
accomplish its statutory mission.

In its 2008-2013 strategic plan, the Commission established an objective to “streamline
and/or reorganize the Commission’s structure to efficiently execute its mission and make
efficient use of its appropriations.” 2 To address this objective, the Commission identified
the need to conduct an assessment of the effectiveness and efficiency of its
administrative structure, and based on the results, develop a plan of action for achieving
increased agency effectiveness and efficiency. However, in its fiscal year 2010
Performance and Accountability Report, 3 the Commission concluded that it did not have
the resources to conduct an assessment of its structure and develop a plan of action.
Furthermore, in the approved goals and objectives for the Commission’s 2014-2018
Strategic Plan, the Commission does not include a goal or objective to restructure the
Commission. The commissioners are aware that restructure may be necessary and the
plan could be updated to include this goal at a later date.

The Commission is a fact-finding federal agency required to report on civil rights issues.
Established by the Civil Rights Act of 1957, the Commission is currently directed by eight
part-time commissioners. The Commission has a number of responsibilities, including
investigating claims of civil rights and voting rights violations and studying and
disseminating information on the impact of federal civil rights laws and policies. 4 The
Commission accomplishes its mission by: (1) investigating alleged deprivations of voting
rights and alleged discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, or
national origin; and (2) (a) studying and collecting information, (b) appraising the relevant
federal laws and policies, (c) serving as a national clearinghouse for information, and (d)
preparing public service announcements or advertising campaigns regarding


2
 U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, Reinvigorating the Nation’s Civil Rights Debate–2008-2013 Strategic
Plan (as adopted October 2007).
3
 U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, Performance and Accountability Report for Fiscal Year 2010.
4
 Commissioners serve 6-year terms. Four commissioners are appointed by the President, two by the
President pro tempore of the Senate, and two by the Speaker of the House of Representatives. No more
than four commissioners can be of the same political party.


Page 4                                                 OIG/USCCR-13-1 USCCR Challenges FY 2012
discrimination or denials of equal protection of the laws under the Constitution of the
United States because of color, race, religion, sex, age, disability, or national origin, or in
the administration of justice. The Commission may hold hearings and, within specific
guidelines, issue subpoenas to obtain certain records and have witnesses appear at
hearings. The Commission must submit to the President and the Congress at least one
report annually that monitors federal civil rights enforcement in the United States, and
such other reports as deemed appropriate by the Commission, the President, or the
Congress.

Our work identified the following serious concerns contributing to the need to align the
Commission’s organizational structure with the budget:

    •    Organizational structure: Our interviews confirmed that the Commission’s
         current organizational structure is not efficient given the reduced staffing levels
         and flat appropriations. The Commission’s organizational structure, governed by
         regulations issued in 2002, 5 was predicated on an organization much larger than
         what exists today. In the past decade, staff levels have dropped by more than 40
         percent, from about 70 in fiscal year 2002 to about 40 in fiscal year 2012,
         including the eight part-time commissioners. The Commission’s current
         organizational structure is composed of seven operational units or offices in
         headquarters and six regional offices (see figure 1).
    •    Lack of a staff director: The staff director position has been vacant since
         January 2011, which significantly hinders the Commission’s ability to establish an
         efficient and effective organizational structure. The staff director for the
         Commission serves as the administrative head of the Commission and is
         appointed by the President with the concurrence of a majority of the Commission.
         Our interviews confirmed that the lack of a staff director is a serious concern
         affecting the leadership of the Commission and the management of its human
         capital. Between February 2011 and April 2012, a senior attorney who was also
         the acting general counsel served as the acting staff director. In addition, the
         position of deputy staff director—responsible for day-to-day administration of the
         agency—has been vacant since at least fiscal year 2007.
    •    Vacancies in other key positions: In addition to the lack of a staff director and
         deputy staff director, the Commission has vacancies in other key positions. As
         shown in figure 1, as of September 30, 2012, nine of the top fourteen positions,
         including the staff director and deputy staff director (more than 64 percent), were
         either vacant, held by managers holding multiple positions, or held by acting
         managers. For example, the director of the southern regional office was also the
         acting director of the western regional office, and the acting chief of the Regional
         Programs Coordination Unit. 6 Further, the Office of Civil Rights Evaluations


5
 45 C.F.R. Chapter VII, 67 Fed. Reg. 70482–70508, Nov. 22, 2002.
6
 The Regional Programs Coordination Unit is responsible for directing and coordinating the programs and
work of the regional offices and 51 State Advisory Committees to the Commission and maintaining liaison
between regional offices and the various headquarters’ offices of the Commission.


Page 5                                                 OIG/USCCR-13-1 USCCR Challenges FY 2012
         (OCRE) has been under the supervision of an acting director for more than 2
         years. This position is important because OCRE is often called upon to provide
         subject matter and analytical expertise for preparing evaluations of civil rights
         issues. As the Commission recently reported, significant gaps exist in all mission-
         critical positions (civil rights analyst, social science analyst, attorney,
         supervisor/manager, information technology specialist, chief of public affairs, and
         chief of congressional affairs). 7


During fiscal year 2012, the Commission took steps to help expedite the appointment of
a staff director or acting staff director. However, in the absence of such an appointment,
the Commission ultimately revised certain policies and procedures, temporarily
reassigning several functions of the staff director.




7
United States Commission on Civil Rights, Human Capital Management Report FY 2011.


Page 6                                             OIG/USCCR-13-1 USCCR Challenges FY 2012
Figure 1: Organization Chart as of September 30, 2012




Page 7                                     OIG/USCCR-13-1 USCCR Challenges FY 2012
Attachment II

Better Leveraging State Advisory Committees

The Commission has long recognized the challenge of effectively utilizing the state
advisory committees that it has established in each of the 50 states and the District of
Columbia, as required by statute. However, the Commission continues to report mixed
progress and acknowledges serious concerns regarding its efforts to reduce the number
of committees not re-chartered after their 2-year charters expire, and to otherwise
increase committee productivity. For example, at the end of fiscal year 2012, only 23 of
the 51 committees had active charters, and the Commission had publicly released only
three committee reports during the year. Therefore, we believe the Commission
continues to face the challenge of leveraging these committees better in helping to
achieve its mission.

State advisory committees are composed of private citizen volunteers appointed by the
Commission to help identify local civil rights issues. Each committee must have a
minimum of 11 members, but no more than 19. Membership is subject to certain general
guidelines, such as balance in the representation of different viewpoints and fairness in
the functions to be performed. The committees can investigate within their states any
subject that the Commission itself is authorized to investigate and provide advice to the
Commission in writing about their findings and recommendations. 8 They are also
authorized to hold public fact-finding meetings and to invite government officials and
private persons to provide information and their views on various subjects. According to
requirements of the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended, each committee must
have a charter approved by the Commission that enables it to operate and which is valid
for a term of 2 years. 9 The Commission is then responsible for renewing the charters. If
the charter is not renewed at the end of the term, the committee terminates.

A May 2006 GAO report highlighted the need for timely re-chartering and made
recommendations to improve the re-chartering process and make the most effective use
of the state advisory committees. 10 The Commission subsequently implemented these
recommendations through actions that included developing a formal process for
approving charters within specific timetables; establishing a 65-day timeframe for
national office review of committee reports, and incorporating the mission and work of


8
 State advisory committees advise the Commission about any (1) alleged deprivations of voting rights and
alleged discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, or national origin, or in
administration of justice, (2) matters related to discrimination or denial of equal protection of the law and
the effect federal laws and policies have with respect to equal protection of the laws, and (3) matters of
mutual concern in the preparation of reports of the Commission to the President and Congress. They are
also charged to assist the Commission and receive reports, suggestions, and recommendations from
individuals, public and private organizations, and public officials upon matters pertinent to advisory
committee inquiries.
9
 Federal Advisory Committee Act, 5 U.S.C. appendix 2.
10
  GAO, U.S. Commission on Civil Rights: The Commission Should Strengthen Its Quality Assurance
Policies and Make Better Use of Its State Advisory Committees, GAO-06-343 (Washington, D.C.: May 1,
2006).


Page 8                                                    OIG/USCCR-13-1 USCCR Challenges FY 2012
these committees in its strategic plan. In addition, the Commission’s 2008-2013 strategic
plan established objectives and performance measures related to state advisory
committees to help meet its goal of shaping a national conversation on current and future
civil rights issues that identifies civil rights priorities for policymakers. 11 For example, an
objective for this goal was to reinvigorate the state advisory committees, which included
performance measures to (1) increase the number of committees re-chartered annually,
(2) eliminate the backlog of un-chartered committees, and (3) achieve an average re-
charter time of 60 days.

As indicated in table 1 below, annual performance measures reported by the
Commission for its state advisory committees showed some limited improvements. In
particular, the number of committees with active charters increased from 26 (51 percent)
in fiscal year 2008 to 36 (71 percent) in fiscal year 2011. However, this progress had not
continued in fiscal year 2012 as only 23 (45 percent) committees had active charters.
Final fiscal year 2012 data on the number of fact-finding activities was not available at
the time we completed our report. Regarding its fiscal year 2011 data, the Commission
acknowledged that due primarily to the lack of civil rights analysts in all but one of its six
regional offices, committee fact-finding activities had decreased and that of the nine
completed reports, only three were fact-finding activities.

Table 1: Commission Performance Data for State Advisory Committees–Fiscal
Years 2008 to 2012
                                                                                         Fiscal year
Number of committee:                                            2008             2009             2010             2011          2012
Active charters (percent of 51 committees)                 26 (51%)         33 (65%)         39 (76%)         36 (71%)        23 (45%)
Reports                                                             5                7                 5               9            3
                                                                                                                                     a
Fact-finding activities (meetings, briefings,                     21               14               22               13
forums)

Final fiscal year 2012 data on the number of fact-finding activities was not available at the time we completed our report.
a


Source: OIG analysis of Commission data.



Our interviews confirmed that timely re-chartering of state advisory committees remains
a serious Commission concern. They also highlighted a number of factors that they
believe contribute to re-chartering delays and other committee productivity issues, which
included:

•    Limited resources to support committee activities: The Commission has
     six regional offices that assist the 51 state advisory committees in their planning, fact-
     finding, reporting, and re-chartering activities. However, regional office staffing to
     accomplish these duties is minimal. Most offices consist of two staff members,




11
  U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, Reinvigorating the Nation’s Civil Rights Debate–2008-2013 Strategic
Plan (as adopted October 2007).


Page 9                                                                  OIG/USCCR-13-1 USCCR Challenges FY 2012
    usually a director and an administrative person. Some commissioners and managers
    also noted that a lack of funding limited committee activities.

•   Commission partisanship: The commissioners are responsible for approving the
    appointment of state advisory committee members. Some commissioners and
    managers believed that partisanship made it difficult to vet committee members,
    which affected the timeliness of re-chartering the committees.

•   Two-year committee appointments: The Commission appoints its state advisory
    committee members for a 2-year term. Some commissioners and managers noted
    that the 2-year appointment term was not long enough, primarily given the
    requirements of the re-appointment process, and offered solutions such as having the
    Commission seek to increase the length of committee appointments.

•   Lack of staff director: Duties of the staff director include submitting
    recommendations for committee appointments to the Commission prior to its vote on
    committee re-chartering as well as approving the release of SAC reports. During
    fiscal year 2012, the Commission had no Presidentially-appointed staff director and
    had an acting staff director for only about the first half of the year. As a result, some
    commissioners and managers identified this as an obstacle to timely committee re-
    chartering and to the low number of SAC reports published.

During fiscal year 2012, the Commission took several actions to address timely re-
chartering. In particular, in the absence of a staff director, the Commission established
temporary procedures that authorized the Commission Chair to review final committee
reports, and created a bipartisan committee of two commissioners to make
recommendations to the Commission on committee re-chartering. In addition, the
Commission approved the goals and objectives for its next strategic plan (2014-2018)
that included an overall goal of increasing the participation of the state advisory
committees, with a specific objective of strengthening the re-chartering process.




(999821)




Page 10                                           OIG/USCCR-13-1 USCCR Challenges FY 2012
Reporting Fraud, Waste, and Abuse in the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights

To report fraud, waste, or abuse in Commission programs and operations, do one of the
following. (You may do so anonymously.)

•   Call toll-free (866) 680-7963 to speak with a hotline specialist, available 24 hours a
    day, 7 days a week.

•   Report online at: https://oig.alertline.com.


Obtaining Copies of Office of the Inspector General Reports, Publications, and
Testimonies

Copies of OIG reports, publications, and testimonies are available on the Commission’s
website: http://www.usccr.gov/OIG/index.php.




Page 11                                            OIG/USCCR-13-1 USCCR Challenges FY 2012
